3 years and 1.0 pre release (#1213)
iterative/dvc.org: content/blog/2020-05-04-dvc-3-years-and-1-0-release.md

---
title: DVC 3 years anniversary and 1.0 pre-release
date: 2020-05-04
description: |
  Today, we’ve got three big things to announce: 🎉 3rd-year anniversary of DVC,
  🚀 DVC 1.0 pre-release is ready and ⭐ 5000 GitHub starts.

descriptionLong: |
  Today, we’ve got three big things to announce.
    - 🎉 3rd-year anniversary of DVC
    - 🚀 DVC 1.0 pre-release is ready
    - ⭐ DVC has reached 5K GitHub starts (coincidently on the same day)

  We are sharing our learnings from this journey and how they affected the new
  DVC 1.0 release.

> picture: /static/uploads/images/2020-05-04/5k_stars.png

Reviewer: just 2020-05-04/5k_stars.png should do the trick

where did you get that full path btw? should we update some docs?

Reviewer: done

pictureComment: 5000 GitHub stars
author: dmitry_petrov

> commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/april-20-heartbeat/347

Reviewer: need to update it before merge

Reviewer: done

tags:

>   - release

Reviewer: release -> Release

users - do we need it?

Reviewer: done

---

> title: DVC 3 Years Anniversary and 1.0 Pre-release

Reviewer: can we omit Anniversary - to make it fit into a single line

Reviewer 2: Maybe "DVC Year 3 and 1.0 Pre-release"

Author: `DVC 3 Years and 1.0 Pre-release` ?

Author: `DVC 3 Years 🎉 and 1.0 Pre-release 🚀` ?

Reviewer 3: What about `3 years of DVC and 1.0 Pre-release`?

date: 2020-05-04
description: |
  Today, we’ve got three big things to announce: 🎉 3rd-year anniversary of DVC,
  🚀 DVC 1.0 pre-release is ready and ⭐ 5000 GitHub starts.

descriptionLong: |

>   Today, we’ve got three big things to announce.

Reviewer 4: `Today, we've got three big announcements.`

  🎉 3rd-year anniversary of DVC

  🚀 DVC 1.0 pre-release is ready

  ⭐ DVC has reached 5K GitHub starts (coincidently on the same day)

>   We are sharing our learnings from this journey and how they affected the new

Reviewer 4: The last sentence is a bit awkward. Maybe, `We'll share what we've learned from our journey and how DVC is growing.`

Author: I'm trying to make a connection between the learning and the features we release. How about `We'll share what we've learned from our journey, how it helped for the release and how DVC is growing.`?

  DVC 1.0 release.

> picture: 2020-05-04/5k_stars.png

Reviewer: we need a 2x size image to make it sharp

pictureComment: 5000 GitHub stars
author: dmitry_petrov
commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/dvc-3-years-anniversary-and-1-0-pre-release/374
tags:
  - Release
  - MLOps
  - DataOps
  - CI/CD
---

## 3 years anniversary!

3 years ago on **May 4th, 2017** the first DVC blog post was published
[Data Version Control beta release: iterative machine learning](https://blog.dataversioncontrol.com/data-version-control-beta-release-iterative-machine-learning-a7faf7c8be67).
It was the first DVC tutorial and later we made a redirect to the new tutorial
page to not to confuse users.
[The first DVC discussion on Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/Python/comments/698ian/dvc_data_scientists_collaboration_and_iterative/).
A few days later it was

> [republished on other sources](https://www.kdnuggets.com/2017/05/data-version-control-iterative-machine-learning.html)

Reviewer 4: I don't think showing these old posts makes a very strong point. I would condense it a lot: 

```Three years ago on **May 4th, 2017**, I published the [first blog post about DVC](https://www.kdnuggets.com/2017/05/data-version-control-iterative-machine-learning.html). Until that point, DVC was a private project between myself and two others, my cofounder Ivan and our collaborator, Ruslan. Today, things look very different.```

or some variant of this

Today, DVC gets recognized at professional conferences: people spot our logo,
and sometimes even our faces, and want to chat. There's much more content about
DVC coming from bloggers than from inside our organization. We're seeing more
and more job postings that list DVC as a requirement, and we're showing up in
[data science textbooks](https://www.amazon.com/Learn-Python-Building-Science-Applications/dp/1789535360).
When we find a new place DVC is mentioned, we celebrate in our Slack - we've
come a long way!

The data science and ML space is fast-paced and vibrant, and we're proud that
DVC is making an impact on discussions about best practices for healthy,
sustainable ML. Every week, we chat with companies and research groups using DVC
to make their teams more productive. We're proud to be part of the growing MLOps
movement: so far, a majority of CI/CD for ML projects are implemented with DVC
under the hood.

I can confidently say that DVC wouldn't have been possible without a lot of help
from our community. Thank you to everyone who has supported us:

> **DVC core team.** The core team of the project takes the majority of the

Reviewer 4: I think take a bigger scope- mention that the team is now 12 full-time people or however large we technically are (even though they're not all "core DVC engineering"; this is more about Iterative).

development activities, constantly brings new ideas, documents the product and

> always on the first line of user's support. Many users knows that great user

Reviewer 4: Grammar rewrite:
```The DVC team has been the force driving the majority of our development- we've grown from 2 to 12 full-time engineers, developers, and data scientists. We often get feedback about how fast our team answers user questions- we've been told our user support is one of DVC's "killer features". It's all thanks to this amazing team.```

and editable. Pipeline stages are now saved in a single metafile, with all
stages stored together instead of in separate files.

Another significan step was the removed checksums from the pipeline metafile.
This improves its human-readability.

### [Plots](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3409)

_Learnings:_ Versioning metrics and plots are no less important than data
versioning.

Countless users asked us when we'd support metrics visualizations. Now it's
here: DVC 1.0 introduces a metrics file visualization command,
`dvc metrics diff`. DVC plots are powered by the
[Vega-Lite](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/) graphic library.

This function is designed not only for showing visualizations based on the
current state of your project, but it can also combine multiple plots from your
Git history in a single chart so you can compare results across commits. Users
can visualize how, for example, their model accuracy in the latest commit
differs from another commit (or even multiple commits).

```dvc
$ dvc plot diff -d logs.csv HEAD HEAD^ d1e4d848 baseline_march
file:///Users/dmitry/src/plot/logs.html
$ open logs.html
```

> ![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/dvc-plot.png)

Reviewer: can we make them a bit bigger?

```dvc
$ dvc plot diff -d logs.csv HEAD HEAD^ d1e4d848 baseline_march \
        -x loss --template scatter
file:///Users/dmitry/src/plot/logs.html
$ open logs.html
```

![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/dvc-plot-scatter.png)

### [Data transfer optimizations](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3488)

_Learnings:_ In ML projects, data transfer optimization is still the king.

We've done substantial work on optimizing data management commands, such as
`dvc pull \ push \ status -c \ gc -c`. Now, based on the amount of data, DVC can
choose an optimal data remote traversing strategy.

> [Wini-indexes](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/2147) were introduced to

Reviewer: better to put link to @pmrowla report

Author: Provided the link and the plot. Looks very solid 😎

help DVC instantly check data directories instead of iterating over millions of
files. This also speeds up file adding\removing to large directories.

More optimizations are included in the release based on performance bottlenecks
we profiled.

### [Hyperparameter tracking](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3393)

_Learnings:_ ML pipeline steps depends only on a subset of config file.

This feature was actually released in the last DVC 0.93 version (see
[params docs](https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/params). However, it is an
important step to support configuration files and ML experiments in a more
holistic way.

I hope our the most active users will find time to check the DVC pre release
version and provide their feeback. The installation instruction is
[on our website](https://dvc.org/doc/install/pre-release).

## 5000 GitHub stars

Activity on our GitHub page has grown organically since the DVC repo went public
on May 4th, 2017. Coincidently, today, in the 3rd year anniversary we have
reached 5000 starts:

> ![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/5k_github.png)

Reviewer 4: I think you should use my owl gif https://gph.is/g/Z5BgyGD

Author: @andronovhopf do you have the same gif without 5K starts on the top?

Author: It looks great but does not work as the front image. The issue is the resolution I guess or gif might not be supported as the front image. Keeping the old one.

## Thank you!

Thank you again for all DVC contributions, community members, and users. Every
piece of your help is highly appreciated and will bring huge benefits to the
entire ecosystem of data and ML projects.

> Stay healthy and safe over in your neck of the woods and be in touch on

Reviewer 4: `Stay healthy and safe, wherever you are in the world. And be in touch on our Twitter and Discord channel!`

**Documentation contributors.** Another
[124 people contributed](https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/graphs/contributors)
to the [DVC documentation](https://dvc.org/doc) and
[the website](https://dvc.org/). Every time a new person tries out DVC, they
benefit from the hard work that's gone into our docs.

**Active community members.** Active DVC users help our team understand and
better anticipate their needs and identify priorities for development. They
share bright ideas for new features, locate and investigate bugs in code, and
welcome and support new users.

**People who give DVC a shot.** Today, there are thousands of data scientists,
ML engineers, and developers using DVC on a regular basis. The number of users
is growing every week. Our [Discord channel](http://dvc.org/chat) has almost two
thousand users. Hundreds more connect with us through email and Twitter. To
everyone willing to try out DVC, thank you for the opportunity.

## DVC 1.0. is the result of 3 years of learning

All these contributions, big and small, have a collective impact on DVC's
development. I'm happy (and a bit nervous) to announce that a pre-release of a

> brand new DVC 1.0 is ready for public beta testing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
brand new DVC 1.0 is ready for public alpha testing.
```

Reviewer 2: "Alpha testing is carried out in a lab environment and usually, the testers are internal employees of the organization" https://www.guru99.com/alpha-beta-testing-demystified.html

The new DVC is inspired by discussions and contributions from our community -
both fresh ideas and bug reports 😅.

Here are the most significant features we’re excited to be rolling out soon:

### [Run cache](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/1234)

_Learnings:_ Forcing users to make Git commits for each ML experiment creates
too much overhead.

DVC 1.0 has a "long memory" of DVC commands runs. This means it can identify if
a `dvc repro` has already been run and save compute time by returning the cached
result - _even if you didn't Git commit that past run_.

We added the run-cache with CI/CD systems and other MLOps and DataOps automation
tools in mind. No more auto-commits needed after `dvc repro` in the CI/CD system
side.

### [Multi-stage DVC files](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/1871)

_Learnings:_ ML pipelines evolve much faster than data engineering pipelines.

We redesigned the DVC-metafile format to make saved pipelines more interpretable
and editable. Pipeline stages are now saved in a single metafile, with all
stages stored together instead of in separate files.

> Another significan step was the removed checksums from the pipeline metafile.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The checksums are no longer stored in the pipeline metafile which improves human-readability.
```

Or, something similar?

Author: good idea!

that shows how many second it takes to run a specific commands on 2M images
directory.

![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/benchmarks.svg)

### [Hyperparameter tracking](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3393)

_Learnings:_ ML pipeline steps depends only on a subset of config file.

This feature was actually released in the last DVC 0.93 version (see
[params docs](https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/params). However, it is an
important step to support configuration files and ML experiments in a more
holistic way.

### New features summary

Each of the big new features and improvements deserve a separate blog post. We
will be posting more - please stay in touch.

I hope our the most active users will find time to check the DVC pre release
version and provide their feeback. The installation instruction is
[on our website](https://dvc.org/doc/install/pre-release).

## 5000 GitHub stars

Activity on our GitHub page has grown organically since the DVC repo went public
on May 4th, 2017. Coincidently, today, in the 3rd year anniversary we have
reached 5000 starts:

![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/5k_github.png)

## Thank you!

> Thank you again for all DVC contributions, community members, and users. Every

Reviewer 3: Did you mean `contributors` here?

Reviewer 2: Agree, maybe something like:
```suggestion
Thank you again to all DVC contributors , community members, and users. Every
```

Many of these folks put hours into their code contributios. We're grateful for
their tenacity and generosity.

![](/static/uploads/images/2020-05-04/vera-sativa.png)_Vera - 100th DVC
contibutor [on GitHub](https://github.com/verasativa/)._

**Documentation contributors.** Another
[124 people contributed](https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/graphs/contributors)
to the [DVC documentation](https://dvc.org/doc) and
[the website](https://dvc.org/). Every time a new person tries out DVC, they
benefit from the hard work that's gone into our docs.

**Active community members.** Active DVC users help our team understand and
better anticipate their needs and identify priorities for development. They
share bright ideas for new features, locate and investigate bugs in code, and
welcome and support new users.

**People who give DVC a shot.** Today, there are thousands of data scientists,
ML engineers, and developers using DVC on a regular basis. The number of users
is growing every week. Our [Discord channel](http://dvc.org/chat) has almost two
thousand users. Hundreds more connect with us through email and Twitter. To
everyone willing to try out DVC, thank you for the opportunity.

> ## DVC 1.0. is the result of 3 years of learning

Reviewer 2: I see this is being addressed in #1230 but I'm not sure if that PR is just a test or for reals.

All these contributions, big and small, have a collective impact on DVC's
development. I'm happy (and a bit nervous) to announce that a pre-release of a
brand new DVC 1.0 is ready for public beta testing.

The new DVC is inspired by discussions and contributions from our community -
both fresh ideas and bug reports 😅.

Here are the most significant features we’re excited to be rolling out soon:

### [Run cache](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/1234)

_Learnings:_ Forcing users to make Git commits for each ML experiment creates

> too much overhead.

Reviewer 2: Also: Should this one be listed after multi-stage pipelines file? Maybe even after `dvc plot`.

Author: @jorgeorpinel this is the strongest one, I think

Reviewer 3: @jorgeorpinel, try it out and you'll know. This will make you fall in love with dvc all over again. :smile:

Reviewer 2: Will do!

side.

### [Multi-stage DVC files](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/1871)

_Learnings:_ ML pipelines evolve much faster than data engineering pipelines.

We redesigned the DVC-metafile format to make saved pipelines more interpretable
and editable. Pipeline stages are now saved in a single metafile, with all
stages stored together instead of in separate files.

The checksums are no longer stored in the pipeline metafile which improves
human-readability.

```yaml
stages:
  process:
    cmd: ./process_raw_data raw_data.log users.csv
    deps:
      - raw_data.log
    params:
      - process_file
      - click_threshold
    outs:
      - users.csv
  train:
    cmd: python train.py
    deps:
      - users.csv
    params:
      - epochs
      - log_file
      - dropout
    metrics_no_cache:
      - summary.json
    metrics:
      - logs.csv
    outs:
      - model.pkl
```

### [Plots](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3409)

_Learnings:_ Versioning metrics and plots are no less important than data
versioning.

Countless users asked us when we'd support metrics visualizations. Now it's
here: DVC 1.0 introduces a metrics file visualization command,

> `dvc metrics diff`. DVC plots are powered by the

Author: yep. why not?

> `dvc metrics diff`. DVC plots are powered by the

Reviewer 2: I'm confused by this sentence. I thought it was about `dvc plot`. Do you want me to expand a little to explain that scalar metrics have their own commands and continuous ones use `dvc plot` visualization?

`dvc pull \ push \ status -c \ gc -c`. Now, based on the amount of data, DVC can
choose an optimal data remote traversing strategy.

[Mini-indexes](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/2147) were introduced to
help DVC instantly check data directories instead of iterating over millions of
files. This also speeds up file adding\removing to large directories.

More optimizations are included in the release based on performance bottlenecks
we profiled. More detailed
[benchmark report](https://gist.github.com/pmrowla/338d9645bd05df966f8aba8366cab308)
that shows how many second it takes to run a specific commands on 2M images
directory.

![](/uploads/images/2020-05-04/benchmarks.svg)

### [Hyperparameter tracking](https://github.com/iterative/dvc/issues/3393)

_Learnings:_ ML pipeline steps depends only on a subset of config file.

This feature was actually released in the last DVC 0.93 version (see
[params docs](https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference/params). However, it is an
important step to support configuration files and ML experiments in a more
holistic way.

### New features summary

Each of the big new features and improvements deserve a separate blog post. We

> will be posting more - please stay in touch.

Author: I was considering this option. But decided to keep that way)

> will be posting more - please stay in touch.

Reviewer 2: OK how about renaming the H3 to something like
`### For more details on the new features`
?
